                                       Some thoughts
                                          Paolo Ferragina


The goal of this note is to define an approach for doing simultaneous training and quantization
of an NN targeted to better compression. As far as we know this is the first time that all these
three steps are managed simultaneously.
We are given a NN with arbitrary weights vector w. For simplicity one can imagine an unstruc-
tured vector of weights w = [wi ]i∈I . In actual applications, the weights are subdivided between
the layers (or even, possibly, finer structures in the NN-like filters) and quantization might be
applied separately to each sub-structure, but this only amounts to partitioning I and adding a
new index.
The NN is endowed with a loss function L(w), typically the sum of prediction errors over a given
set of input-output pairs (xh , y h ); the exact form is immaterial for our discussion. The training of
the NN is typically poised as the optimization problem of finding weights that minimize the loss.
However, off-sample accuracy of the NN greatly benefits from adding to the loss a regularization
term, such as the Ridge or the Lasso regularization, so that the problem reads as follows:

                                 min{ L(w) + λΩ(w) : w ∈ Rn } ,

where λ is the hyperparameter weighting the loss with the regularization (in order to allow ex-
ploring the bias/variance trade-off). For example, one can choose Ω to try to achieve multiple
goals at the same time. One instance is improving off-sample accuracy while at the same time
pruning a large number of weights, i.e., having wi = 0 for many i in the optimal solution so
as to obtain a sparser vector for which inference is cheaper: one can set Ω(w) = ∥w∥1 , which
is known to be a simple yet effective way to achieve such a result. But, things may be more
complex than that. That is, w may be partitioned into a number of “prunable structures”: by
eliminating all weights in the structure NN is “effectively reduced in size”, meaning that its in-
ference performances increase (possibly, but not necessarily, at the cost of some accuracy), while
eliminating only some of them actually has no effect. Indeed, eliminating only one weight hardly
impacts inference performances in current computer implementations (GPU, NN accelerators):
for this to happen, appropriate subsets of weights need be pruned. This is at least one neuron
(all its incident arcs), but often even larger structures like a filter in a convolutional NN. Achiev-
ing “structured” sparsity can be obtained, e.g., by properly modified Ω such as the Structured
Perspective Regularization (shortly, SPR [?]).
We want to mimic this approach and define a regularization term Ω that promotes also com-
pressibility of the weight vector w, again with the aim of improving performance in terms of
inference time and compressibility.
For this, the weights (of a level) of the NN, which are real values in the range [0, 1], will be
quantized to a finite set and then compressed with entropy-based approaches (for now aiming
at 0-th order entropy, then we will see...). We assume that quantization occurs in C buckets
that, for simplicity, are equal-sized and thus 1/C. We count buckets from zero, and thus the
b-th bucket is Bb = [b/C, (b + 1)/C), where the right extreme is not included. We assume that
all weights falling in Bb will be quantized with one of the values in the bucket. This value is
kept in a table, and can be chosen for simplicity as the left range-extreme b/C or the value in
the middle. This is not important from a compression point of view because these values will be


                                                  1
encoded via the symbol b, and then "resolved" at matrix-vector multiplication time. If we define
by cb the positive integer
                     PC−1 counting how many weights belong to the bucket Bb , the entropy can
be estimated as − b=0 cb log2 cb , and we wish to minimize the entropy of the optimal vector
w. It is clearly also important to increase the accuracy (minimize the loss) of the NN, as well as
regularising w. Since, intuitively, these goals are contrasting, some hyperparameters that govern
their relative importance will be needed on top of the “standard” one.
We therefore consider

                        min{ L(w) + λ(αR(w) + (1 − α)ϕ(w)) : w ∈ Rn } ,

where:

   • L(w) is the loss of the NN, that will be defined and managed by whatever standard ML
     tool (say Pytorch) we use, and therefore need not be discussed in any detail here; in
     particular, what the tool needs is its gradient ∇L(w) or an approximation thereof (in case
     L is nondifferentiable, which easily happens e.g. with the ReLU activation, but nobody
     cares) that is enough to iteratively update the weights w;

   • R(w) is any existing regularization term, such as R(w) = ∥w∥22 , R(w) = ∥w∥1 , or maybe
     even the SPR to take into account structured sparsity; again we assume that the tool we
     use already is able to compute its gradient ∇R(w) (or an approximation thereof);

   • our new compression-enhancing term

                                                                                               (1)
                               P
                   ϕ(w) = min b∈B cb log2 cb
                                                                                               (2)
                                    P
                              wi = b∈B+ vb xi,b                              i∈I
                                                                                               (3)
                               P
                                 b∈B xi,b = 1                                i∈I
                                                                                               (4)
                                   P
                              cb = i∈I xi,b                                 b∈B
                                  xi,b ∈ {0, 1}                      i∈I, b∈B                  (5)

     where we have used B+ = B − {0}, because v0 = 0. Note that we use the standard 0-th
     order entropy to measure the achieved amount of quantization+compression, measuring
     which requires—by means of standard integer programming tricks—to introduce the very
     large number of binary variables xi,b ∈ {0, 1}, denoting the fact that the weight wi ∈ Bb ,
     and more precisely that wi = vb . Constraints (2) express the requirement that each wi
     equals exactly one of the values vb because exactly one of the xi,b is one due to (3). Note
     that we are not summing for b = 0 due to the assumption v0 = 0, as observed above. The
     auxiliary variables cb defined by (4) just count the total number of occurrences of each
     symbol b ∈ B, to be used in the objective; they do not need to be explicitly declared as
     integral since the xbi are integrals (see (5)).

Due to the min/min nature of the problem, one may think to look at it as a whole, i.e.,

                min{ L(w) + λ(αR(w) + (1 − α) b∈B cb log2 cb ) : (2)–(5) }                     (6)
                                               P

but this problem is combinatorial and has many gazillions variables, since the w are many already,
and there are a huge number of binary variables xi,b : with C = 256 corresponding to 8-bit floats
or ints this is 256 × n, with n that can scale up to the 100s of billions. Hence, this problem
is hugely difficult. Furthermore, we want to be able to exploit the standard ML tools (say,
Pytorch) that are not set for solving that; rather, they do gradient-based approaches. For this,
if Ω = R they would compute ∇L(w) (or an approximation thereof if L is nondifferentiable) and
∇R(w) (ditto), which they can do efficiently, and use the overall gradient ∇L(w) + λ∇R(w) to
update w. The only thing we need to do is then to compute (an approximation of) ∇ϕ(w) (since

                                                  2
the function, as it is stated, is not even continuous, let alone differentiable) and substitute in the
above:
                           ∇R(w)        with     α∇R(w) + (1 − α)∇ϕ(w)
to be passed to Pytorch as ∇Ω; it will then do the rest. Thus, with a “minimal” modification
(that Pytorch et similia are typically well organised to let us do) we can add to any existing regu-
larization term another component that takes into account the achieved amount of quantization.
This is of course yet different from, and possibly in contrast to, the two other objectives, i.e., loss
and “generic” regularization; this is why the further hyperparameter α needs to be introduced.
All this, however, relies on the ability to compute (an approximation of) ∇ϕ(w). The nice thing
is that the overall approach can be expected to work even if the gradient is “very approximated”,
so we are free to play around with it.
We therefore want to compute some approximation of ∇ϕ(w). This is nontrivial because the
function is not even continuous: since the right-hand-side in (2) is an integer (the xi,b are), there
is no solution whenever w ∈  / Zn , i.e., ϕ(w) = +∞. Hence, the first thing we need to do surely is
to relax (5) into
                                      xi,b ∈ [0, 1] i∈I, b∈B                                        (7)
to ensure that ϕ(w) is at least defined everywhere. Now, if the objective (1) were linear or at
least convex, this would be easy. In fact, then ϕ(w) would be the value function of a convex
program, which is a convex function for which a subgradient (an appropriate generalization of
gradient which we are completely happy with) would be easy to find. In particular, if (1) were
convex, any approach for solving (1)–(4) and (7) would produce optimal Lagrangian multipliers
β ∗ = [βi∗ ]i∈I for constraints (2): then, it is well known that β ∗ ∈ ∂ϕ(w), i.e., β ∗ is a subgradient
of the value function. We could therefore take ∇ϕ(w) = β ∗ and run away with it.
We therefore need to find a convex version of the problem (1)–(4) and (7) that produces suitable
dual optimal multipliers β ∗ , despite the fact that the entropy-related term in the objective is
concave, while the problem is a minimization one. Besides, (1)–(4) and (7) is a huge problem
that, even if it were convex (and it is not), would be difficult to solve. Fortunately, our beloved
Lagrangian approaches give us a way to solve both problems at once. In fact, we consider the
Lagrangian relaxation of the constraints (4) using multipliers ξ = [ξb ]b∈B :

              ϕw (ξ) = min{ b∈B cb log2 cb + b∈B ξb (cb − i∈I xbi ) : (2) , (3) , (7) }              (8)
                             P                   P            P

and the corresponding Lagrangian Dual

                                       max{ ϕw (ξ) ; ξ ∈ RC } .                                     (9)

For any fixed w, ϕw (ξ) is a concave function of the ξ variables and hence “easy to maximize”
provided one can solve the problem
                                                         b                               (10)
                 P                  P              P
            min    b∈B cb log2 cb +   b∈B ξb (cb −  i∈I xi )
                                                                                         (11)
                      P
                wi = b∈B+ vb xi,b                                            i∈I
                                                                                         (12)
                 P
                   b∈B xi,b = 1                                              i∈I
                  xi,b ∈ [0, 1]                                                i∈I, b∈B            (13)

Indeed, the optimal solution x∗ for fixed ξ (and w) provides a subgradient of ϕw (ξ) that can be
used to drive an iterative approach to find an optimal solution to (9); the details are not crucial
here. The issue is therefore to be able to efficiently solve (10)–(13), which fortunately is easy in
that the problem decomposes in many separate subproblems:
   • One on each variable cb , b ∈ B, decoupled from all others, of the form

                                    min{cb log2 cb − ξb cb : cb ∈ [0, c̄b ]}

                                                   3
     for some upper bound c̄b that should be easy to compute. This can be easily optimised
     by a closed formula. Note that this eliminates one source of nonconvexity (the entropy)
     since the Lagrangian dual automatically convexifies. On the other hand, the entropy being
     concave it means that we are actually minimising its convex envelope, which is a linear
     function. So, the approximation may be rather coarse and this may lead to bad results.
     I’d say that computing a not-too-big c̄b may help, but we’ll have to see.

   • One for each original weight wi , i ∈ I, of the form
                                          b                                                   (14)
                               P
                          min    b∈B ξb xi
                              wi = b∈B+ vb xbi                                                (15)
                                    P

                                        b                                                     (16)
                               P
                                 b∈B xi = 1
                                xbi ∈ [0, 1]                           b∈B                    (17)

     This is an extremely simple LP for which it should be trivial to devise specialised methods;
     it’s basically akin to a continuous knapsack problem, I’m reasonably certain this can be
     solved in O(C) time after that the Lagrangian multipliers ξb are ordered (and this ordering
     need be done only once and then re-used for all i).

The fact that (14)–(17) is an LP also means the following: each time we solve it, for fixed ξ
(and w) we also find the optimal dual solution βi∗ of (15). Thus, assume that (for fixed w) we
have computed the optimal solution ξ ∗ of (9): in doing so we have surely computed ϕw (ξ ∗ ), i.e.,
solved all (14)–(17) for all i ∈ I, i.e., computed the optimal dual solution βi∗ of (15) for that
fixed ξ ∗ (and w) and all i ∈ I. Then, these βi∗ are the optimal dual solution of constraints (2)
in the “convexified version” of (1)–(4), (7) corresponding to the Lagrangian dual. Just believe
it. Hence, one can take ∇ϕ(w) = β ∗ and run away with it. Of course, such a gradient will be
approximate, but this is usually not a big deal.
For this to work one needs to find the optimal Lagrangian multipliers ξ ∗ , which is an iterative
process. However, as already mentioned, there are not too many buckets, hence not too many
constraints (4), hence not too many multipliers ξ; let’s say not more than 256, so that dual space
is not too huge. Anyway, the idea can be to run this optimization only approximately and be
done with whatever best multipliers ξ¯ we get after an appropriately small number of iterations.
Given ξ,¯ the dual optimal solution β̄ ∗ of the constraint (15) in (14)–(17) (for all i ∈ I) will
provide the needed (approximation of) ∇ϕ(w) as above. This introduces error in the gradient,
but the gradient is approximated anyway, so it could work. Each iteration of the process looks to
be roughly linear in n = |I| = the number of neurons, so it should be doable even on a very-large
scale provided that the total number of iterations to find ξ¯ is not too large (consider that the
optimization of ξ will need to be re-done whenever w changes during the standard fitting process,
although one can, say, re-start the process from the last solution of the previous round, which
may help).
On large problems the computational cost of this little trick will still be nontrivial, but with
some effort it may be made work. If the thusly computed (sub)gradient ∇ϕ(w) is any effective
in driving the minimization process towards a low-entropy w∗ is all to be seen, but it may even
work.




                                                4
